Add directives reference page (#282)
withastro/docs: src/pages/en/reference/directives-reference.md

---
layout: ~/layouts/MainLayout.astro
title: Directives Reference
---

> Directives are special properties that can be passed to HTML elements, Astro components, And UI Framework components. Directives can only be used inside of Astro components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Directives are special properties that can be passed to HTML elements, Astro components, And UI Framework components. 

Directives are Astro-specific attributes, used in your `.astro` component to "direct" Astro as it renders your HTML template.
```

(Is that accurate to say? I like linking directives with attributes because I think that's a more commonly-known word to less-experienced developers.)

> The directives on this page are originised by what they can be used on.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page describes the options available for directing Astro to render different types of content on your page.
```

### `client:idle`

Start importing the component JS as soon as main thread is free.

💡 *Useful for items that don't need to be immediately interactive.*

### `client:visible`

Start importing the component JS as soon as the element enters the viewport.

💡 *Useful for content lower down on the page.*

### `client:media={QUERY}`

Start importing the component JS as soon as the browser matches the given media query.

💡 *Useful for sidebar toggles, or other elements that might be used only for certain screen sizes.*

> ⚠️ Remember, this directive only refers to making the component *interactive* at certain media queries. This does not affect the component being *rendered to the screen*, nor its *visibility*!

### `client:only=" "`

Start importing the component JS at page load, similar to `client:load`.

💡 *Useful for components that are entirely dependent on client-side APIs.* 

>⚠️ This component will be **skipped** at build time, and to assist the client, you should specify which renderer to use from the array in your [`astro.config.mjs` configuration](/en/reference/configuration-reference).
>
> e.g. `<client:only="react" />` or `<client:only="my-custom-renderer" />`

> ## Script and Style tags

Reviewer: I'm not sure how I feel about this organization. There's one directive that can be used on both, then (because hoist is going away) there's one that can be used on style. (And then below, there's the everything section)

I think this is in part why originally, this new organization didn't sit well with me. I'm not convinced that this is a useful section grouping, in part because if I look in the sidebar, I'd click here to look for CSS or script stuff, and I'm honestly not sure that I would further look and notice "Everything."

So, I'll continue reading the rest of this for content, but I don't know that this is page is just yet best organized for people who will be scanning sidebars and trying to go directly to particular sections of content.

Author: I think this is redundant now, given that there's now also `is:inline`.

> These directives can be used on HTML `<script>` and `<style>` tags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following directives can be used on both HTML `<script>` and `<style>` tags.
```

> These directives can be used on HTML `<script>` and `<style>` tags.

Reviewer: (NB: I originally edited this to say "used on both" script and style tags, but then when I read further, I realized that this entire section wasn't just things that can be used on both. That's what led to my long comment above.)

### `define:vars={variables}`

Pass variables into a `<script>` or `<style>` tag. Any *serializable* front matter variable is supported, including props passed to your component through `Astro.props`.

> >⚠️ `define:vars` cannot be used on a `<script>` tag that makes use of the `hoist` directive.

Reviewer: How will these two warning notes need to change if hoist is now the default behaviour? (Also related to whether we need to continue to describe hoist if it's no longer going to be a specific directive that you add, but is in fact default behaviour. Do we need to document that adding this makes the script not hoisted? So, what do we actually need to say about hoist?)

Author: Already done!

>
> e.g. `<script hoist type="module" define:vars={{ myVariable }}>` will not work!

```astro
---
const foregroundColor = "rgb(221 243 228)";
const backgroundColor = "rgb(24 121 78)";
const message = "Astro is awsome!";
---
<h1>Hello</h1>

<style define:vars={{ textColor: foregroundColor, backgroundColor }}>
  h1 {
    background-color: var(--backgroundColor);
    color: var(--textColor);
  }
</style>

<script define:vars={{ message }}>
  alert(message);
</script>
```

> ### `hoist`

Reviewer: As mentioned, I *think* `hoist` is going away soon enough that maybe it should just be removed from this page right now? Check with @natemoo-re

Opt-in the contents of a `<script>` tag to being bundled and processed. ESM imports work, even to npm packages.

Astro detects these JavaScript client-side imports and then builds, optimizes, and adds the JavaScript to the page automatically.

```astro
// ESM import
<script hoist type="module">
  import './some-external-script.js';
</script>
```

>⚠️ `hoist` Always needs to be used in conjunction with `type="module"`.
>
> e.g. `<script hoist type="module">`

### `global`

> Make the contents of a `<style>` tag apply globaly on pages where the component is included by disabling Astro's CSS scoping system.

Reviewer: "apply globally on pages where the component is included" -- just checking, is this exactly what the global tag does? These styles take affect only where that component is included? I had thought global made styles global to your whole site, no matter which component they were written in (because we have a warning about that in the CSS/Styling page that says "this affects all the h1's on your site).

Author: Hmm, I'm not actually sure on this one. I'll ask someone in discord.

Author: Alright, Fred confirmed that they only apply to pages where the component is included. ([Message link](https://discord.com/channels/830184174198718474/830184175176122389/959898750183149568))

This is equivalent to wrapping all of the selectors within a `<style>` tag with `:global()`.

> ```astro

Reviewer: The examples here show that the two forms are analogous, but neither of them describes what the styling/CSS effect produced is. This is a case where I think the original page itself has more information than the part on the directives page, so probably requires deciding what is going to go where. (And, I'm not convinced having this here is better than having it on the CSS page itself, making readers click through.)

Author: I was originally worried about content duplication, which is why I moved it here. I've added a link back to the styling page - is that good enough for now?

<style global>
  a {
    text-decoration: none;
  }
  a:hover {
    text-decoration: underline;
  }
</style>
<style>
  :global(a) {
    text-decoration: none;
  }
  :global(a:hover) {
    text-decoration: underline;
  }
</style>
```

## HTML elements

These directives can be used on any HTML element, even the lowly `<div>`.

### `set:html={html}`

Inject an HTML string into an element without it being escaped.

```astro
---
const title = "Hello <strong>World</strong>"
---
<h1>{title}</h1> <!-- <h1>Hello &lt;strong&gt;World&lt;/strong&gt;</h1> -->
<h1 set:html={title} /> <!-- <h1>Hello <strong>World</strong></h1> -->
```

You can also use it on a `<Fragment>` to avoid adding a wrapper element.

```astro
---
const cmsContent = await fetchDataFromMyCMS();
---
<Fragment set:html={cmsContent}>
```

### `set:text={text}`

The opposite of `set:html`. `set:text` ensures that any HTML content passed to it is escaped.

```astro
---
const potentialyDangerousContent = await fetchUserGeneratedContent();
---
<Fragment set:text={potentialyDangerousContent}>
```

> 

Reviewer: I like the examples above, but I feel like I'd want to know what the default behaviour is, if neither of these are used. (Is there a default? Is it context dependent?) If one is going to escape and one isn't, then why do I need more than one directive?  :)

In the first example, not using any directive did NOT escape, but set:html did. So, I might be wondering when I would use/need set:text, and not just leave it to the default behaviour. So I think some kind of further note might be useful here.

Author: Yeah I think you're right.

> ## Everything

Reviewer: I do love your description of "the works"! :)

But, I don't think "Everything" is a useful header. And, if I've already scanned the sidebar and found what I was looking for (script, css, framework), then I wouldn't think to keep looking and notice "Everything."

So, I'm open to suggestions for this. Two thoughts come to mind, either renaming to something like "universal" (not great, but you get what I mean) and/or moving these directives up to the TOP and starting out with, "Here's some stuff you can use on everything!" then let the page get into specific use cases.

These directives are avalible on HTML elements, UI Framework components, Astro components, the works!

### `is:raw`

> Instructs the Astro compiler to treat any children of that element as text, similar to the default behavior of `<script>` and `<style>` which don't support expressions. This means that all special Astro templating syntax will be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instructs the Astro compiler to treat any children of that element as text. This means that all special Astro templating syntax will be ignored.
```
(I found that extra note a little confusing. Does the sentence work just as well without?)

Used internally by the `<Markdown>` component.

For example, if you had a custom Katex component that converted some text to HTML, you could have users do this:
  
```astro
---
import Katex from '../components/Katex.astro';
---

<Katex is:raw>Some conflicting {syntax} here</Katex>
```

### `class:list`

Serializes a JavaScript expression to a string of CSS class names. Similar to the [clsx](https://github.com/lukeed/clsx) helper library.

The final `class` string is passed to the component/element as the `class` prop.

> >⚠️ `class:list` will not be parsed if its value is not an expression.

Reviewer: I would move the warning below the expression. Show how it does work first, then a warning about how it doesn't.

---
layout: ~/layouts/MainLayout.astro
title: Directives Reference
---

> And UI Framework components. Directives can only be used inside of Astro components.

Reviewer: Did you mean to leave this in? It seems like a fragment from the previous draft.

Author: Whoops, yep
